add page for PX4 ROS library (#2740)
PX4/PX4-user_guide: en/ros2/px4_ros2_interface_lib.md

# PX4 ROS 2 Interface Library

> The [PX4 ROS 2 Interface Library](https://github.com/Auterion/px4-ros2-interface-lib) is a C++ library to simplify controlling PX4 from ROS 2.

Reviewer: FMI, is plan to move library into PX4 org?

Author: I don't know, it's not up to me.

![ROS2 modes overview diagram](../../assets/middleware/ros2/px4_ros2_interface_lib/ros2_modes_overview.svg)

<!-- Source: https://docs.google.com/drawings/d/1WByCfgcytnaow7r41VhYJL8OGrw1RjFO51GoPMQBCNA/edit -->

The following sections define and explain the terms used in the diagram.

### Definitions

#### Mode

A mode defined using the interface library has the following properties:

- A mode is a component that can send setpoints to the vehicle in order to control its motion (such as velocity or direct actuator commands).
- A mode selects a setpoint type and sends it while it is active.
  It can switch between multiple setpoint types.
- A mode can't activate other modes, and must be activated by the user (through RC/GCS), the flight controller in a failsafe situation, a _mode executor_, or some other external system.
- Has a name displayed by the GCS.
- Can configure its mode requirements (for example that it requires a valid position estimate).
- A mode can perform different tasks, such as flying to a target, lowering a winch, releasing a payload and then fly back.

> - A mode can replace a mode defined in PX4.

Reviewer: FYI I added this point.

   [DEBUG] [example_mode_manual]: Arming check request (id=1, only printed once)
   ```

8. On the PX4 shell, you can check that PX4 registered the new mode:

   ```sh
   commander status
   ```

   The output should contain:

   ```{5}
   INFO  [commander] Disarmed
   INFO  [commander] navigation mode: Position
   INFO  [commander] user intended navigation mode: Position
   INFO  [commander] in failsafe: no
   INFO  [commander] External Mode 1: nav_state: 23, name: My Manual Mode
   ```

9. At this point you should be able to see the mode in QGroundControl as well:

   ![QGC Modes](../../assets/middleware/ros2/px4_ros2_interface_lib/qgc_modes.png)

10. Select the mode, make sure you have a manual control source (physical or virtual joystick), and arm the vehicle.
    The mode will then activate, and it should print the following output:

    ```sh
    [DEBUG] [example_mode_manual]: Mode 'My Manual Mode' activated
    ```

11. Now you are ready to create your own mode.

## How to Use the Library

The following sections describe specific functionality provided by this library.
In addition, any other PX4 topic can be subscribed or published.

> ### Mode Class Definition

Reviewer: We have no Mode Executor definition. Is that planned or just delayed, or what? It would be good to provide a realistic example.

Author: I can add that.

```cpp{1,5,7-9,24-31}
class MyMode : public px4_ros2::ModeBase // [1]
{
public:
  explicit MyMode(rclcpp::Node & node)
  : ModeBase(node, Settings{"My Mode"}) // [2]
  {
    // [3]
    _manual_control_input = std::make_shared<px4_ros2::ManualControlInput>(*this);
    _rates_setpoint = std::make_shared<px4_ros2::RatesSetpointType>(*this);
  }

  void onActivate() override
  {
    // Called whenever our mode gets selected
  }

  void onDeactivate() override
  {
    // Called when our mode gets deactivated
  }

  void updateSetpoint(const rclcpp::Duration & dt) override
  {
    // [4]
    const Eigen::Vector3f thrust_sp{0.F, 0.F, -_manual_control_input->throttle()};
    const Eigen::Vector3f rates_sp{
      _manual_control_input->roll() * 150.F * M_PI / 180.F,
      -_manual_control_input->pitch() * 150.F * M_PI / 180.F,
      _manual_control_input->yaw() * 100.F * M_PI / 180.F
    };
    _rates_setpoint->update(rates_sp, thrust_sp);
  }

private:
  std::shared_ptr<px4_ros2::ManualControlInput> _manual_control_input;
  std::shared_ptr<px4_ros2::RatesSetpointType> _rates_setpoint;
};
```

> - `[1]`: First we create a class that inherits from `px4_ros2::ModeBase`

Reviewer: Do you think we could create a "reference" of the public API - just names and a description for the main classes at the end. Starting from a reference tells you what documentation is available/missing.

Author: Yes we could use doxygen

Reviewer: I am going to assume you have this on your list :-)

- `[3]`: This is where we create all objects that we want to use later on.
  This can be RC input, setpoint type(s), or telemetry. `*this` is passed as a `Context` to each object, which associates the object with the mode.
- `[4]`: Whenever the mode is active, this method gets called regularly (the update rate depends on the setpoint type).
  Here is where we can do our work and generate a new setpoint.

After creating an instance of that mode, `mode->doRegister()` must be called which does the actual registration with the flight controller and returns `false` if it fails.
In case a mode executor is used, `doRegister()` must be called on the mode executor, instead of for the mode.

### Setpoint Types

A mode can choose its setpoint type(s) it wants to use to control the vehicle.
The used types also define the compatibility with different vehicle types.

The following sections provide a list of commonly used setpoint types.
You can also add your own type by adding a class that inherits from `px4_ros2::SetpointBase`, sets the configuration flags according to what the setpoint requires, and then publishes any topic containing a setpoint.

> <!--

Reviewer: Todo

#### GoTo Position Setpoints

TODO
-->

#### Direct Actuator Control Setpoint (DirectActuatorsSetpointType)

Actuators can be directly controlled using the [px4_ros2::DirectActuatorsSetpointType](https://github.com/Auterion/px4-ros2-interface-lib/blob/main/px4_ros2_cpp/include/px4_ros2/control/setpoint_types/direct_actuators.hpp) setpoint type.
Motors and servos can be set independently.
Be aware that the assignment is vehicle and setup-specific.
For example to control a quadrotor, you need to set the first 4 motors according to its [output configuration](../concept/control_allocation.md).

:::note
If you want to control an actuator that does not control the vehicle's motion, but for example a payload servo, see [below](#controlling-an-independent-actuator-servo).
:::

> 

Reviewer: This is supposed to list the setpoints right? But we only show `DirectActuatorsSetpointType`. Is that the only one that works? I ask because we above talk about ManualControlInput and RatesSetpointType so I would have expected those.

It would be good to list above in the parent all the types that you expect to have, and link down to the ones that are defined. If they are not implemented yet, don't link them and suffix with `(not yet implemented)`

Author: Yes the other ones are still experimental, under a subdirectory: https://github.com/Auterion/px4-ros2-interface-lib/tree/main/px4_ros2_cpp/include/px4_ros2/control/setpoint_types/experimental.
We can mention that as well.

### Controlling an Independent Actuator/Servo

If you want to control an independent actuator (a servo), follow these steps:

1. [Configure the output](../payloads/#generic-actuator-control-with-mavlink)
2. Create an instance of [px4_ros2::PeripheralActuatorControls](https://github.com/Auterion/px4-ros2-interface-lib/blob/main/px4_ros2_cpp/include/px4_ros2/control/peripheral_actuators.hpp) in the constructor of your mode.
3. Call the `set` method to control the actuator(s).
   This can be done independently of any active setpoints.

### Telemetry

> Telemetry, such as local or global position estimates can be found under [px4_ros2/odometry](https://github.com/Auterion/px4-ros2-interface-lib/tree/main/px4_ros2_cpp/include/px4_ros2/odometry).

Reviewer: Are these topics the same as the normal PX4 ones? Would be good to explain the origin etc.

Author: Yes this will need a lot more documentation.

Reviewer: I'll add links to the ones we know exist now.

Use `commander status` while the mode is running to get that information.

For example:

```plain
   INFO  [commander] External Mode 1: nav_state: 23, name: My Manual Mode
```

means you would select **External Mode 1** in QGC:
![QGC Mode Assignment](../../assets/middleware/ros2/px4_ros2_interface_lib/qgc_mode_assignment.png)

:::note
PX4 ensures a given mode is always assigned to the same index by storing a hash of the mode name.
This makes it independent of startup ordering in case of multiple external modes.
:::

### Replacing an Internal Mode

An external mode can replace an existing internal mode, such as [Return](../flight_modes/return.md) mode (RTL).
By doing so, whenever RTL gets selected (through the user or a failsafe situation), the external mode is used instead of the internal one.
The internal one is only used as a fallback when the external one becomes unresponsive or crashes.

The replacement mode can be set in the settings of the `ModeBase` constructor:

```cpp
Settings{kName, false, ModeBase::kModeIDRtl}
```

## CI: Integration Tests

> When opening a pull request to PX4, CI runs the integration tests of the library.

Reviewer: What do the CI tests do for you?

Specifically I think this is interesting, but I assume these run ROS2 and the SDK together with PX4. That is very cool, so we should say that, and perhaps provide pointers to how people can write their own?

Author: For now it makes sure the mode registration works, and a few other things like failsafes and mode replacement.
We can go much further with this and also test setpoints or just PX4 in general, since with DDS we can easily access PX4 internal topics. But I'm not sure about that yet, at the minimum it will require lockstep and work robustly.

# PX4 ROS 2 Interface Library

:::warning Experimental
At time of writing parts of the PX4 ROS 2 Interface Library is experimental, and hence subject to change:

- The architecture and core interfaces for defining modes in ROS 2 modes are largely stable.
  The library offers significant benefits over using offboard mode in its current state.
- Only a few setpoint types have settled (the others are still under development).
  You may need to use internal PX4 topics which may not remain backwards-compatible over time.
- The API is not fully documented.
- Testing in CI is still limited.

> :::

Reviewer: FYI I added section "Experimental" up the top. What I'm trying to do here is explain that the mode stuff works now and already gives you a benefit over using offboard mode, but that many of the abstractions we provide for working with ROS 2 do not exist yet. So you can use it but likely things will change.

I've done it in bullets so you can extend easily if you want. I'm open to any text which sets the level of expectation appropriately (i.e. this is "for discussion").

### Mode Executor Class Definition

This section steps through an example of how to create a mode executor class.

```cpp{1,4-5,9-16,20,33-57}
class MyModeExecutor : public px4_ros2::ModeExecutorBase // [1]
{
public:
  MyModeExecutor(rclcpp::Node & node, px4_ros2::ModeBase & owned_mode) // [2]
  : ModeExecutorBase(node, px4_ros2::ModeExecutorBase::Settings{}, owned_mode),
    _node(node)
  { }

  enum class State // [3]
  {
    Reset,
    TakingOff,
    MyMode,
    RTL,
    WaitUntilDisarmed,
  };

  void onActivate() override
  {
    runState(State::TakingOff, px4_ros2::Result::Success); // [4]
  }

  void onDeactivate(DeactivateReason reason) override { }

  void runState(State state, px4_ros2::Result previous_result)
  {
    if (previous_result != px4_ros2::Result::Success) {
      RCLCPP_ERROR(_node.get_logger(), "State %i: previous state failed: %s", (int)state,
        resultToString(previous_result));
      return;
    }

    switch (state) { // [5]
      case State::Reset:
        break;

      case State::TakingOff:
        takeoff([this](px4_ros2::Result result) {runState(State::MyMode, result);});
        break;

>       case State::MyMode:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      case State::MyMode: // [6]
```

# PX4 ROS 2 Interface Library

:::warning Experimental
At time of writing parts of the PX4 ROS 2 Interface Library is experimental, and hence subject to change:

> - The architecture and core interfaces for defining modes in ROS 2 modes are largely stable.
>   The library offers significant benefits over using offboard mode in its current state.
> - Only a few setpoint types have settled (the others are still under development).
>   You may need to use internal PX4 topics which may not remain backwards-compatible over time.
> - The API is not fully documented.
> - Testing in CI is still limited.

Reviewer: Minor variation. Clarifies that the core stuff is tested. Doesn't mention testing on the setpoint types, but you'd probably assume not fully tested as they are experimental.

```suggestion
- The architecture and core interfaces for defining modes in ROS 2 modes are largely stable, and are tested in CI.
  The library offers significant benefits over using offboard mode in its current state.
- Only a few setpoint types have settled (the others are still under development).
  You may need to use internal PX4 topics which may not remain backwards-compatible over time.
- The API is not fully documented.
```

            runState(State::RTL, result);
          });
        break;

      case State::RTL:
        rtl([this](px4_ros2::Result result) {runState(State::WaitUntilDisarmed, result);});
        break;

      case State::WaitUntilDisarmed:
        waitUntilDisarmed([this](px4_ros2::Result result) {
            RCLCPP_INFO(_node.get_logger(), "All states complete (%s)", resultToString(result));
          });
        break;
    }
  }

private:
  rclcpp::Node & _node;
};
```

- `[1]`: First we create a class that inherits from `px4_ros2::ModeExecutorBase`.
- `[2]`: The constructor takes our custom mode that is associated with the executor and passes it to the constructor of `ModeExecutorBase`.
- `[3]`: We define an enum for the states we want to run through.
- `[4]`: `onActivate` gets called when the executor becomes active. At this point we can start to run through our states.
  How you do this is up to you, in this example a method `runState` is used to execute the next state.
- `[5]`: According to the state, we call a method from `ModeExecutorBase` that asynchronously runs the requested mode.
  A callback is passed which is called upon completion.

>   This provides a `Result` argument which tells you whether the operation succeeded or not.

Reviewer: My C++ is a bit rusty, but I think that  `run`, `takeoff`, `rtl`, `WaitUntilDisarmed` are functions that take a callback when they compete, and you are using these to drive the state machine - right?

Do we have a list of the available functions and explanation of their behaviour? Because I expect these have mappings to existing modes.

Further, we need to mention  `scheduleMode()` because I think that is how you run an arbitrary mode. Right?

Author: Yes and yes. We can mention it, but in general I think we should have generated API docs for these.

Reviewer: @bkueng OK I spelled it out.

```suggestion
- `[1]`: First we create a class that inherits from `px4_ros2::ModeExecutorBase`.
- `[2]`: The constructor takes our custom mode that is associated with the executor and passes it to the constructor of `ModeExecutorBase`.
- `[3]`: We define an enum for the states we want to run through.
- `[4]`: `onActivate` gets called when the executor becomes active. At this point we can start to run through our states.
  How you do this is up to you, in this example a method `runState` is used to execute the next state.
- `[5]`: On switching to a state we call an asynchronous method from `ModeExecutorBase` to start the desired mode: `run`, `takeoff`, `rtl`, and so on.
  These methods are passed a function that is called on completion; the callback provides a `Result` argument that tells you whether the operation succeeded or not.
  The callback runs the next state on success.
- `[6]`: In the state handler for the mode executors "owned mode" we use the `scheduleMode()` method to start the mode.
  This follows the same callback pattern as the other methods/states.
```

1. [Configure the output](../payloads/#generic-actuator-control-with-mavlink)
2. Create an instance of [px4_ros2::PeripheralActuatorControls](https://github.com/Auterion/px4-ros2-interface-lib/blob/main/px4_ros2_cpp/include/px4_ros2/control/peripheral_actuators.hpp) in the constructor of your mode.
3. Call the `set` method to control the actuator(s).
   This can be done independently of any active setpoints.

### Telemetry

Telemetry topics include:

- [OdometryGlobalPosition](https://github.com/Auterion/px4-ros2-interface-lib/blob/main/px4_ros2_cpp/include/px4_ros2/odometry/global_position.hpp): Global position
- [OdometryLocalPosition](https://github.com/Auterion/px4-ros2-interface-lib/blob/main/px4_ros2_cpp/include/px4_ros2/odometry/local_position.hpp): Local position, velocity and acceleration.

:::note
These topics provide a wrapper around the internal PX4 topics, allowing the library to maintain compatibility if the internal topics change.
Check [px4_ros2/odometry](https://github.com/Auterion/px4-ros2-interface-lib/tree/main/px4_ros2_cpp/include/px4_ros2/odometry) for new topics, and of course you can use any ROS 2 topic published from PX4.

> :::

Reviewer: This needs checking. I wanted to add a little information on what we support now at this level, and a reason why we bother.

Use `commander status` while the mode is running to get that information.

For example:

```plain
   INFO  [commander] External Mode 1: nav_state: 23, name: My Manual Mode
```

means you would select **External Mode 1** in QGC:

![QGC Mode Assignment](../../assets/middleware/ros2/px4_ros2_interface_lib/qgc_mode_assignment.png)

:::note
PX4 ensures a given mode is always assigned to the same index by storing a hash of the mode name.
This makes it independent of startup ordering in case of multiple external modes.
:::

### Replacing an Internal Mode

An external mode can replace an existing internal mode, such as [Return](../flight_modes/return.md) mode (RTL).
By doing so, whenever RTL gets selected (through the user or a failsafe situation), the external mode is used instead of the internal one.
The internal one is only used as a fallback when the external one becomes unresponsive or crashes.

The replacement mode can be set in the settings of the `ModeBase` constructor:

```cpp
Settings{kName, false, ModeBase::kModeIDRtl}
```

## CI: Integration Tests

When opening a pull request to PX4, CI runs the library integration tests.

> These test that mode registration, failsafes, and mode replacement, work as expected.

Reviewer: FYI just added a comment about what the tests do now. I know this means possible future maintenance of docs when they do more, but I think it is worth explaining.

# PX4 ROS 2 Interface Library

:::warning Experimental
At time of writing parts of the PX4 ROS 2 Interface Library is experimental, and hence subject to change:

- The architecture and core interfaces for defining modes in ROS 2 modes are largely stable.
  The library offers significant benefits over using offboard mode in its current state.
- Only a few setpoint types have settled (the others are still under development).
  You may need to use internal PX4 topics which may not remain backwards-compatible over time.
- The API is not fully documented.

> - Testing in CI is still limited.

Author: This is ok, but just fyi most of the things that are there are tested. Mostly the setpoint types (with their expected behavior) that are not.

Reviewer: Then let's say that :-)
